Protein traffic in bacteria: multiple routes from the ribosome to and across the membrane. Bacteria use several routes to target their exported proteins to the plasma membrane. The majority are exported through pores formed by SecY and SecE. Two different molecular machineries are used to target proteins to the SecYE translocon. Translocated proteins, synthesized as precursors with cleavable signal sequences, require cytoplasmic chaperones, such as SecB, to remain competent for posttranslational transport. In concert with SecB, SecA targets the precursors to SecY and energizes their translocation by its ATPase activity. The latter function involves a partial insertion of SecA itself into the SecYE translocon, a process that is strongly assisted by a couple of membrane proteins, SecG, SecD, SecF, YajC, and the proton gradient across the membrane. Integral membrane proteins, however, are specifically recognized by a direct interaction between their noncleaved signal anchor sequences and the bacterial signal recognition particle (SRP) consisting of Ffh and 4.5S RNA. Recognition occurs during synthesis at the ribosome and leads to a cotranslational targeting to SecYE that is mediated by FtsY and the hydrolysis of GTP. No other Sec protein is required for integration unless the membrane protein also contains long translocated domains that engage the SecA machinery. Discrimination between SecA/SecB- and SRP-dependent targeting involves the specificity of SRP for hydrophobic signal anchor sequences and the exclusion of SRP from nascent chains of translocated proteins by trigger factor, a ribosome-associated chaperone. The SecYE pore accepts only unfolded proteins. In contrast, a class of redox factor-containing proteins leaves the cell only as completely folded proteins. They are distinguished by a twin arginine motif of their signal sequences that by an unknown mechanism targets them to specific pores. A few membrane proteins insert spontaneously into the bacterial plasma membrane without the need for targeting factors and SecYE. Insertion depends only on hydrophobic interactions between their transmembrane segments and the lipid bilayer and on the transmembrane potential. Finally, outer membrane proteins of Gram-negative bacteria after having crossed the plasma membrane are released into the periplasm, where they undergo distinct folding events until they insert as trimers into the outer membrane. These folding processes require distinct molecular chaperones of the periplasm, such as Skp, SurA, and PpiD.

