A novel mechanism controls anaerobic and catabolite regulation of the Escherichia coli tdc operon. The tdc operon is subject to CRP-controlled catabolite repression. Expression of the operon is also induced anaerobically, although this regulation does not rely on direct control by either FNR or ArcA. Recently, the anaerobic expression of the tdc operon was found to be fortuitously induced in the presence of glucose by a heterologous gene isolated from the Gram-positive anaerobe Clostridium butyricum. The gene, termed tcbC, encoded a histone-like protein of 14.5 kDa. Using tdc-lacZ fusions, it was shown that TcbC did not activate tdc expression by functionally replacing any of the operon regulators. In vitro transcription analyses with RNA polymerase and CRP revealed that faithful CRP-dependent transcription initiation occurred only on supercoiled templates. No specific, CRP-dependent transcription initiation was observed on relaxed or linear DNA templates. Surprisingly, purified His-tagged TcbC activated transcription from a relaxed, circular template, but not from supercoiled or linear templates. Examination of the CRP binding site of the tdc promoter revealed that it was located 43.5 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site. Repositioning of the CRP site at -41.5 bp abolished activation by the TcbC protein and allowed CRP-dependent transcription to occur on linear, relaxed and supercoiled templates. TcbC bound DNA non-specifically; however, in topoisomerase I relaxation assays, it was demonstrated that TcbC imposed torsional constraints on negatively supercoiled DNA, which influenced the ability of the enzyme to relax the topoisomers. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that TcbC activates transcription of tdc by altering the local topological status of the tdc promoter and that, in the wild-type tdc promoter, the CRP binding site is misaligned to allow transcription to occur only under optimal conditions. Indeed, in vivo transcription analyses revealed that repositioning of the CRP binding site to -41.5 bp resulted in high-level, CRP-dependent transcription, even under catabolite-repressing conditions, and that transcription was no longer influenced by TcbC. Remarkably, however, anaerobic regulation of the mutant promoter was retained. This indicates that the other tdc regulators, TdcA and TdcR, govern anaerobic transcription activation by CRP.

