Differential regulation of multiple proteins of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium by the transcriptional regulator SlyA. SlyA is a transcriptional regulator of Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, and other bacteria belonging to the ENTEROBACTERIACEAE: The SlyA protein has been shown to be involved in the virulence of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium, but its role in E. coli is unclear. In this study, we employed the proteome technology to analyze the SlyA regulons of enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) and Salmonella serovar Typhimurium. In both cases, comparative analysis of the two-dimensional protein maps of a wild-type strain, a SlyA-overproducing derivative, and a corresponding slyA mutant revealed numerous proteins whose expression appeared to be either positively or negatively controlled by SlyA. Twenty of the putative SlyA-induced proteins and 13 of the putative SlyA-repressed proteins of the tested EIEC strain were identified by mass spectrometry. The former proteins included several molecular chaperones (GroEL, GroES, DnaK, GrpE, and CbpA), proteins involved in acid resistance (HdeA, HdeB, and GadA), the "starvation lipoprotein" (Slp), cytolysin ClyA (HlyE or SheA), and several enzymes involved in metabolic pathways, whereas most of the latter proteins proved to be biosynthetic enzymes. Consistently, the resistance of the EIEC slyA mutant to heat and acid stress was impaired compared to that of the wild-type strain. Furthermore, the implication of SlyA in the regulation of several of the identified E. coli proteins was confirmed at the level of transcription with lacZ fusions. Twenty-three of the Salmonella serovar Typhimurium proteins found to be affected by SlyA were also identified by mass spectrometry. With the exception of GroEL these differed from those identified in the EIEC strain and included proteins involved in various processes. The data suggest that gene regulation by SlyA might be crucial for intracellular survival and/or replication of both EIEC and Salmonella serovar Typhimurium in phagocytic host cells.

